college football

MINNESOTA FIRES COACH The University of Minnesota fired Coach Glen Mason yesterday, two days after the Gophers blew a 31-point third-quarter lead against Texas Tech at the Insight Bowl. He signed a four-year contract extension exactly one year ago.

Mason was 64-57 in 10 seasons at Minnesota and led the Gophers to seven bowl games. But he was 3-4 in those games; in the latest loss, Texas Tech pulled off the biggest comeback in bowl history to capture a 44-41 victory. That dropped the Gophers to 6-7 for the season, the first time they finished under .500 in five years.

“If we had not lost the way we had lost, I don’t think we’d be here today,” said Joel Maturi, the Minnesota athletic director. (AP)

tennis

HINGIS ADVANCES Martina Hingis beat Sybille Bammer of Austria, 6-0, 6-2, in a first-round match yesterday at the Australian Women’s Hardcourt Championship in Gold Goast. The formerly top-ranked Hingis returned here last season after three years on the sidelines and reached the semifinals.

Hingis finished the 2006 season at No. 7 in the world rankings.

“Now I’m No. 7 in the world, I’ve won a couple of tournaments and played some great matches against top players so I know I can handle myself out there,” she said. “Last year I didn’t know and I found out after a few rounds, but it definitely took me a while to get used to the nerves.”(AP)

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

hockey

U.S. JUNIORS REACH QUARTERFINALS Defenseman Jack Johnson scored a power-play goal in overtime yesterday to lift the United States to a 3-2 victory over Sweden and into the quarterfinals of the world junior championship in Leksand, Sweden.

Johnson scored on a high shot 3 minutes 16 seconds into overtime, securing a matchup tomorrow against Finland. The United States led by 2-1 before Fredrik Pettersson tied the score on a rebound with 14 seconds left in regulation after Sweden pulled its goalie for a sixth skater. (AP)

DUCKS LOSE PRONGER Pierre-Marc Bouchard scored twice and Mark Parrish added the winner late in the third period for the Minnesota Wild last night in a 4-3 victory against Anaheim. The Wild gained its 16th home victory, the best in the N.H.L. this season.

Ducks defenseman Chris Pronger broke his left foot when he blocked a shot by Parrish in the first period. (AP)

IN OTHER GAMES Pavel Datsyuk and Jason Williams each had a goal and an assist and Dominik Hasek made 28 saves for the Detroit Red Wings in a 6-2 victory against visiting Los Angeles. ... Manny Malhotra scored the winner late in the second period to lift host Columbus to a 3-1 victory against Chicago. Sergei Fedorov and Duvie Westcott also scored for the Blue Jackets. ... Alexei Zhitnik scored the go-ahead goal in visiting Philadelphia’s 5-2 victory against Carolina. Ryan Potulny and Kyle Calder scored early in the third period for the Flyers, who were outshot 42-19. ...Joe Thornton scored his 200th career goal to help visiting San Jose snap a three-game losing streak with a 4-2 victory against Dallas.(AP)