BANGKOK, Jan. 1 — Supporters of the government that was ousted in a coup three months ago were responsible for explosions across Bangkok during New Year’s Eve celebrations, Gen. Surayud Chulanont, the interim prime minister, said today.

The nine small bombs killed three people, wounded more than 30 and caused the cancellation of official celebrations here and in the northern city of Chiang Mai.

“From the evidence we have gathered, there is a slim chance that it is related to the southern insurgency,” General Surayud told reporters. “It is likely related to people who lost their political benefits.”

The former prime minister, Thaksin Shinawatra, was ousted in a nonviolent coup on Sept. 19, and the military junta that took over has been warning that his supporters continue to pose a threat.

“The people who carried out the bombings were ill-intentioned individuals who want to have political impact,” General Surayud said. “They want to create a scenario of a politically unstable Thailand.” He added that “the kind of bombs used, the places they picked and the timing show that their intention was to cause panic and fear.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Other Thai officials also expressed doubt that the bombs were the work of Islamic militants in Thailand’s three largely Muslim southern provinces, where bombs and shootings have taken 1,900 lives in the past two years.

There was no claim of responsibility but the attacks added to fears of violence in the months to come as Thailand grapples with a political crisis after the coup in September.

Mr. Thaksin’s supporters denied involvement in the bombings. But the ruling junta has warned of what it calls “undercurrents” of pro-Thaksin opposition that threaten the country’s stability.

The junta has maintained a state of martial law long after it said it would be ended, and last week it won funding from its appointed civilian government for a 14,000-member special action force to maintain civic order.

There was no public comment from Mr. Thaksin, who was away from Thailand at the time of the coup and has been traveling around the region in recent months. He was most recently reported to be in China.

The first six small bombs exploded within an hour of each other Sunday evening, mostly in places where they did not seem designed to cause widespread injury, including a bus stop, a parking area near a shopping mall, a small open market and two police posts.

Police officers were sent to guard the sites of the bombings and to secure other possible targets. Hotels tightened security, shopping malls closed early and the police cleared Khao San Road, where backpackers from around the world traditionally gather on New Year’s Eve.

Mayor Apirak Kosayothin closed a New Year’s celebration in a public plaza more than three hours early and said other public countdowns would also be canceled.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Due to several bomb explosions in Bangkok and for the sake of peace and security, I would ask all of you to return to your homes now,” he told a crowd of 5,000 people. The police then began clearing the square.

Crowds remained in the streets for some time, however, waving from behind television reporters at the scenes of some of the bombings.

At the stroke of midnight cheers went up around the city and the sky was filled with multicolored bursts of fireworks and festive explosions.

In the moments that followed, it was discovered that three of those explosions were additional bombs that wounded eight more people, six of them foreigners, according to hospital officials.

Two of those bombs were planted at the plaza where Bangkok’s mayor had told the crowd to disperse hours earlier.

Unease over the pace and direction of the interim government has grown as it has failed to bring the expected charges of corruption against Mr. Thaksin, has continued its restrictions on free expression and political activity, and mismanaged a fiscal crisis in late December.

The government has said it will draw up a new constitution and hold elections by late next year. But its work has gone slowly, and opposition to military rule has grown from civil libertarians as well as from the Thaksin camp.

Abhisit Vejjajiva, the leader of the minority Democrat Party, said Saturday that he expected Mr. Thaksin’s backers to step up political attacks on the military-backed government in the coming year.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

He referred to recent accusations of corruption against General Surayud, and said, “Such fighting will be more fierce next year.”

Shootings and bombings in southern Thailand have become an almost daily occurrence. But so far, the violence appears not to have spread to Bangkok and other parts of the country.

The southern violence appears to have a number of causes. The ethnic Malay Muslims have complained over the years of neglect and discrimination by the distant capital in this largely Buddhist nation.

Whatever the cause of the bombings, the daily newspaper The Nation said in a front-page editorial that “this Kingdom is facing its most menacing threat.”

“They want us to panic,” it said, referring to the New Year’s bombers. “They want us to point fingers, pass the blame and fight among ourselves. They want to aggravate our political turmoil.”