TAMPA, Fla., Jan. 1 — Joe Paterno stepped gingerly onto the sideline at Raymond James Stadium this morning, his cane firmly in hand as a Penn State staffer, security and cameras hovered. It was a significant milestone in Paterno’s recovery from a broken left leg and torn ligaments on Nov. 4, when he was run over on the sideline by two players during a game at Wisconsin. Finally, Paterno was back on the field.

He did not stay very long. Paterno, who turned 80 on Dec. 21, stood for eight minutes before slowly making his way back to the tunnel during pregame warmups and then up to the press box. He was still too fragile and immobile to risk another hit coaching the Nittany Lions against Tennessee in the Outback Bowl.

Instead, Paterno watched from above along with 65,601 fans as a defensive battle turned on an 88-yard fumble return by Penn State cornerback Tony Davis with 10 minutes 1 second remaining to lift the Nittany Lions to a 20-10 victory against No. 17 Tennessee. It as the 22nd bowl victory of Paterno’s career, and his team finished the season 9-4.

The fumble return happened one play after a 53-yard pass from Tennessee quarterback Erik Ainge, nephew of the Boston Celtics executive Danny Ainge, to tight end Chris Brown gave the Volunteers (9-4) a first down on the Penn State 14-yard line — Tennessee’s best scoring opportunity of a lean second half.

The Vols appeared on their way to breaking a 10-10 tie. But linebacker Sean Lee punched the ball out of running back Arian Foster’s arms on the next play, and Davis picked up the ball and sprinted down the sideline for the touchdown that put Penn State in control.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Nittany Lions added a 22-yard field goal by Kevin Kelly with 3:29 remaining for the final score.

Neither team controlled play in the opening half and a handful of big plays on each side led to a 10-10 tie at halftime. Tennessee had tied the score at 10-10 with 1:15 remaining in the second quarter on a 42-yard run by LaMarcus Coker, who beat a tackler at the line of scrimmage and split a pair of defenders along the sideline on his way to the end zone.

Penn State had built its 10-3 lead on the previous drive, with a 2-yard touchdown pass from Anthony Morelli to Andrew Quarless capping a 92-yard drive with 3:30 left in the second quarter. The drive was highlighted by a 24-yard run by Tony Hunt that moved the ball out from deep in Penn State territory, and a 31-yard pass from Morelli to Deon Butler that put the ball on the Tennessee 2-yard line.

Tennessee had taken a 3-0 lead on a 44-yard field goal by James Wilhoit in the first quarter. A fumble on a muffed reverse play led to Penn State’s 34-yard tying field goal by Kelly early in the second quarter.

Paterno, in his 41st season at Penn State’s helm, ran his team from above as it all unfolded. He’ll have to wait until next season to coach Penn State from the sidelines.

The injury and long recovery have led some to wonder if this might be the end for Paterno. Not yet, he says, although the idea has crossed his mind.

“Maybe I shouldn’t be coaching at 80, I don’t know,” Paterno had said at a news conference in Tampa in the days leading up to the bowl game. “Sometimes in the middle of the night when I’m looking at Tennessee tape I said, ‘What the heck am I doing in this job?’ I could be sleeping and getting up in the morning and walk around the block and not have to worry.

“But it’s fun. If I didn’t enjoy it, I’d get out of it.”