“Day One is now,” he said at the end of the speech.

After making ethical reform one of the central pledges of his campaign, Mr. Spitzer has watched from the sidelines in recent weeks as scandal has engulfed the upper reaches of state government.

“The reform we seek is substantial in size and historic in scope,” Mr. Spitzer said in his speech. “It will require a new brand of politics — a break from the days when progress was measured by the partisan points scored or the opponents defeated.”

Photo

“No longer can we afford merely to tinker at the margins of the status quo or play the politics of pitting one group against another,” he said. “We must replace delay and diversion with energy and purpose in the halls of our capital.”

Mr. Spitzer signed the executive orders on a desk once used by Theodore Roosevelt, in a room of the mansion known as the History Room, which also includes a wheelchair used by Franklin D. Roosevelt. After Mr. Spitzer signed the orders and answered some questions, he strode out of the room, but he and his wife, Silda, were drawn back in after his dogs — Jesse (bichon frisé) and James (wheaten terrier) — bolted in and began barking at members of the news media.

Asked how much sleep he had gotten, Mr. Spitzer said, “Probably not enough.”

“I think I came upstairs, from downstairs, at about 12:30, probably went to sleep at about 1, but I will admit that about 4:30, combination of wondering what the weather was going to be this morning, I started getting up to peer out the window.”

Mr. Spitzer’s first executive order prohibited state workers at public agencies and authorities from accepting gifts of more than nominal value and prohibited the use of state property, including vehicles, computers and telephones, for non-official business. And in what seemed to be a reference to the scandal that led to the resignation of former Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi, the order said that individuals authorized by their agencies to use vehicles for personal purposes “shall keep records of such use, and the value of such personal use shall be calculated and reported as personal income.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The same order also prohibited nepotism in hiring and contracting and barred former state workers from lobbying their former agencies for two years.

Since the November election, Mr. Hevesi, a Democrat, has resigned as comptroller and pleaded guilty to a felony. The Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, a Republican, has revealed that federal authorities were investigating his outside consulting work. State Senator Efrain González Jr., a Democrat, has been charged with stealing more than $400,000 in state money. And a state court judge has forced a recalcitrant Legislature to reveal how it spends hundreds of millions of dollars worth of taxpayer money on pet projects.

Mr. Spitzer is trying to reshape a state government notoriously resistant to change. Voters re-elected Mr. Hevesi as their comptroller after he admitted using state employees to chauffeur his wife. And while nearly a dozen lawmakers faced criminal charges in the last few years, many were subsequently re-elected. Mr. Spitzer will probably gain more traction from voters by delivering on his other priorities, including lowering property taxes and revitalizing the upstate economy.

The second order prohibited state workers from donating money to the campaigns of the governor or lieutenant governor, or affiliated political action committees.

“I do not believe it looks proper for individuals who work for the governor, the lieutenant governor, to be making contributions,” he said, adding: “The appearance might be that they have been expected to do so, or it is a condition of employment. None of that should exist.”

The order also barred employment officials from asking job candidates about their party affiliation and barred state officials from appearing in advertisements paid for by state entities, a frequent practice of former Gov. George E. Pataki. The order also prohibited commissioners and executive directors of agencies and public authorities from running for public office without first resigning.

Photo

In a third order, the governor said all state agencies and authorities must come up with a plan to broadcast their meetings on the Internet, if they are subject to the state’s Open Meetings Law.

“It may be that nobody clicks through and watches, but at least the possibility of watching what these boards do and how they meet and how they discuss the issues is important,” Mr. Spitzer said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

A fourth order established judicial screening committees to evaluate and recommend judicial candidates for a range of judgeships across the state.

A fifth order, which Mr. Spitzer described as “ministerial,” continued a number of executive orders from the Cuomo and Pataki administrations.

As attorney general, Mr. Spitzer made his name by taking on Wall Street corruption as the bull market of the late 1990’s unraveled and the Securities and Exchange Commission had a limited appetite for enforcement, giving him an opening to redefine his job and make himself a nationally known figure.

But he now must learn to work by consensus instead of by subpoena, and close watchers of the Albany scene say Mr. Spitzer must act fast so as not to lose momentum.

Still, while reform proposals have stalled for years in the Legislature, lawmakers are aware that Mr. Spitzer was elected by a record margin.

During the campaign, he outlined a complicated set of priorities, including reining in state spending to offset escalating future deficits, but also increasing spending on education and cutting by half the number of New Yorkers without health insurance.

At the forefront are his plans for ethical reforms, while a

second focus will be investing in the state’s infrastructure, including large transportation projects like replacing the Tappan Zee Bridge and building the Second Avenue subway. He also wants the state to take a much more assertive role in creating lower-cost housing.

Perhaps the most complicated part of his three-pronged agenda is his plan for economic revitalization. Reviving the economy of upstate New York, and particularly the Buffalo area, is of such concern that he split the leadership of the Empire State Development Corporation in half, with leaders for upstate and downstate. He also wants to rein in state spending overall, in part by overhauling the Medicaid system, but also by lowering property taxes and providing relief to businesses on issues like workers’ compensation policies. At the same time, he wants to increase education spending by billions of dollars.